Hello and welcome back to the course on Deep Learning.
Today we're talking about stochastic gradient descent.
Previously we learned about gradient descent
and we found out that it is a very efficient method
to solve our optimization problem
where we're trying to minimize the cost function.
It basically takes us from
10 to the parallel 57 years
to solving a problem within minutes or hours
or within a day or so and it really helps speed things up
because we can see which way is downhill
and we can just go in that direction
and take steps and get to the minimum faster.
But the thing with the gradient descent
is that this method requires for the cost function
to be convex and as you can see here
we've specifically chosen a convex cost function.
Basically convex means that the function looks similar
to what we are seeing now
that it's just convexed into one direction
and that it in essence has one global minimum
and that's the one that we're going to find.
But what if our function is not convexed?
What if our cost function is not convexed?
What if it looks something like this?
Well first of all how could that happen?
Well that could happen because if we first of all
choose a cost function which is not the squared difference
between Y-hat and Y
or if we do choose the cost function
which is like that but then in the multidimensional
space it can actually turn into something
that is not convex.
And so what will happen in this case
if we just try to apply our normal gradient descent method
something like this could happen.
We could find a local minimum of the cost function
rather than the global one so this one was the best one
and we found the wrong one and therefor
we won't have the correct weight.
We don't have an optimized neural network.
We have a subpar neural network.
And so what do we do in this case?
Well the answer here is stochastic gradient descent
and it turns out the stochastic gradient descent
doesn't require for the cost function to be convex.
So let's have a look at the two differences
between the normal gradient descent that we talked about
and the stochastic gradient descent.
So normal gradient descent is when we take all of our rows
we plug them into our neural network and once again
here we've got the neural network copied over several times
but the rows are being plugged into that same
neural network every time
so there's only one neural network.
This is just for visualization purposes.
And then once we've plugged them in
we've calculated our cost function
based on the formula on the right
and looking at the chart at the bottom
and then we adjust the weights then.
This is called the gradient descent method
or this also, the proper term is
the batch gradient descent method.
So we take the whole batch from our sample
we apply it and then we run that.
The stochastic gradient method is a bit different.
Here we take the rows one by one
so we take this row
we run our neural network and then we adjust the weights.
Then we move onto the second row.
We take the second row
we run our neural network
we look at the cost function
and we adjust the weights again.
(gently chiming bell)
then we take another row, take row three
we run our neural network
we look at the cost function
we adjust the weights.
So basically we're looking at
we're adjusting the weights after every single row
rather than doing everything together
and then adjusting weights.
Two different approaches
and now we're going to just compare the two side-by-side.
So here they are
this is to visually remember them.
So you've got the batch gradient descent
where you are adjusting the weights
after you've run them
after you've run all of the rows in your neural network
and then basically you adjust the weights
and then you run the whole thing again
iteration, iteration, iteration.
In the stochastic gradient descent method
you run one row at a time
and you adjust the weights.
You adjust the weights.
You adjust the weights and then you do everything again
and again and that is called
the stochastic gradient descent method.
The main two differences are
that this stochastic gradient descent method
helps you avoid the problem
where you find those local extraneural
or local minimums
rather than the overall global minimum.
And the reason for that in simple terms is that the SGD
or the stochastic gradient descent method
has much higher fluctuation because it can afford them.
It's doing one iteration or one row at at time
and therefor the fluctuations are much higher
and it is more likely to find the global minimum
rather than just the local minimum
and the other thing
about the stochastic gradient descent method
compares to the batch gradient is that it's faster.
Like the first impression that you might have
is because it's doing every single row one at a time
it is slower but actually in fact it is faster
because it doesn't have to load up all the data into memory
and run and wait until all those rows are run altogether.
You can just run them one by one
so it's a much lighter algorithm.
It's much faster in that sense.
So it has way more
in those senses you have more advantages
over the batch gradient descent method.
The main advantage of
or the main kind of like pro
for the batch gradient descent method
is that it is a deterministic algorithm
rather than a stochastic gradient descent
being a stochastic algorithm
meaning it's random
and with the batch gradient descent method
as long as you have the same starting weights
for your neural network every time you run
the batch gradient descent method
you will get the same iterations
the same results for the way your weights are being updated.
First for the stochastic gradient descent method
you won't get that because it is a stochastic method.
You are picking your rows possible at random
and you are updating your neural network
in a stochastic manner and
therefor you're just going to every single time
you run the stochastic gradient descent method
even if you have the same weights at the start
you're going to have a different process
a different iterations to get there.
So that's in a nutshell what stochastic gradient descent is.
Also there is a method in between the two
called the mini batch gradient descent method
where you combine the two and you basically run
rather than running a whole batch or run one at a time
you run batches of rows maybe 5, 10, 100
however many rows you decided to set.
You run that number of rows at a time
then you update your weights and
you update your weights and so on.
That's called the mini batch gradient descent method.
If you'd like to learn more about gradient descent
there's a great article which you can have a look at.
It's called A Neural Network in 13 lines of Python
Part two Gradient Descent by Andrew Trask
and the link's below
it's on GitHub 2015 article.
Very well written in very simple terms.
It's got some interesting philosophical
or just interesting thoughts on
how to apply gradient descent.
What are the advantages and disadvantages
and how to do things in certain situations.
So it's got some very cool tips and tricks and hacks.
Very easy read so definitely check that out
and another one a bit more heavier read
for those of you who are into mathematics
who want to get to the bottom of the mathematics.
Why gradient descent that specific?
What are the formulas that are driving gradient descent?
How is it calculated?
And so on.
Check out the article or actually the book
it's a free online book
called Neural Networks and Deep Learning
by Michael Nielsen, 2015 book.
It's just basically
it's all online. You can go ahead and check it out there.
Again, very soft introduction to the mathematics
but then the mathematics are pretty heavy as you go along
as you read through the article but at the same time
it gets you into that mood.
I think it has like a warmup chapter
where you first warm up with the math
and then you jump in.
If you're interested in math then
this is the article to go to.
And there you go.
So that's in a nutshell
the difference between gradient descent
and stochastic gradient descent
and how the two work
and on that note we're going to wrap up today's tutorial.
I look forward to seeing you on the next one
and until then enjoy Deep Learning.